It is astounding how significantly
one idea can shape a society and its policies.
Consider this one:
If taxes on the rich go up,
job creation will go down.
This idea is an article of faith for Republicans
and seldom challenged by Democrats
and has indeed shaped much
of the economic landscape.
But sometimes the ideas
that we are certain are true
are dead wrong.
Consider that for thousands of years,
humans believed that the Earth
was the center of the Universe.
It's not.
And an astronomer
who still believes that it was
would do some pretty terrible astronomy.
Likewise, a policy maker who believes
that the rich are job creators
and therefore should not be taxed
will do equally terrible policy.
I have started and helped start
dozens of companies
and initially hired lots of people,
but if there was no-one around
who could afford to buy what we have to sell,
all those companies and
all those jobs would have evaporated.
That's why I can say with confidence
that rich people don't create jobs.
Nor do businesses, large or small.
Jobs are a consequence
of a circle of lifelike feedback loop
between customers and businesses.
And only consumers can set in motion
this virtual cycle of increasing demand and
hiring.
In this sense, an ordinary consumer is
more of a job creator than a capitalist like
me.
That's why, when business people
take credit for creating jobs,
it's a little bit like squirrels
taking credit for creating evolution.
It's actually the other way round.
Anyone who's ever run a business knows
that hiring more people is a
course of last resort for capitalists.
This is what we do if, and only if
rising consumer demand requires it.
And in this sense, calling ourselves job creators
isn't just inaccurate: it's disingenuous.
That's why our existing policies
are so upside down.
When the biggest tax exemptions and
the lowest tax rates benefit the richest,
all in the name of job creation,
all that happens is that the rich get richer.
Since 1980, the share of income for
the top 1% of Americans has more than tripled,
while our effective tax rates
have gone down by fifty percent.
If it was true that lower taxes for the rich
and
more wealth for the wealthy led to job creation,
today, we would be drowning in jobs.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
And yet, unemployment and
underemployment is at record highs.
Another reason that
this idea is so wrong-headed
is that there can never be enough
super rich people to power a great economy.
Somebody like me makes 100s, or 1000s
of times as much as the median American.
But I don't buy 100s or 1000s
of times as much stuff.
My family owns three cars, not 3000.
I buy a few pairs of pants and
shirts a year like most American men,
occasionally, we go out to eat with friends.
I can't buy enough of anything
to make up for the fact
that millions of unemployed
and underemployed Americans
can't buy any new cars, any clothes,
or enjoy any meals out.
Nor can I make up for the falling consumption
of the vast majority of middle-class families
that are barely squeaking by,
hurried by spiraling costs,
and trapped by stagnant or declining wages.
Here's an incredible fact:
If the typical American family still retained
the same share of income that they did in
1970,
they'd earn like 45,000 dollars more a year.
Imagine what our economy
would be like if that were the case.
Significant privileges
have come to people like me,
capitalists, for being perceived as job creators
at the center of the economic universe,
and the language and metaphors we use
to defend the current economic
and social arrangements is telling.
It's a small jump from "job creator"
to "the creator".
(Laughter) (Applause)
This language obviously
wasn't chosen by accident,
and it's only honest to admit that when
somebody like me calls themselves a "job creator",
we're not just describing
how the economy works,
but more particularly, we're making a claim
on status and privileges that we deserve.
Speaking of special privileges,
the extraordinary differential between
the 15% tax rate that capitalists pay
on carried interest, dividends, and capital
gains,
and the 35% top marginal rate
on work that ordinary Americans pay
is kind of hard to justify
without a touch of deification.
We've had it backwards for the last 30 years.
Rich people like me don't create jobs.
Jobs are a consequence of an eco-systemic
feedback loop between customers and businesses.
And when the middle class thrives,
businesses grow and hire, and owners profit.
That's why taxing the rich to pay
for investments that benefit all
is such a fantastic deal
for the middle class and the rich.
So, ladies and gentlemen,
here's an idea worth spreading:
In a capitalist economy,
the true job creators are middle class consumers
and taxing the rich to make investments
to make the middle class grow and thrive
is the single shrewdest thing we can do
for the middle class, for the poor,
and for the rich.
Thank you.
(Applause)